---
layout: page
title: Dust production by supernovae
permalink: /dust/
---

Core collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are a potential source of the large amounts of dust seen in some high-redshift galaxies. They occur rapidly (compared to galaxy evolution timescales), and many supernova remnants (SNRs) show evidence of dust formation in the ejecta. The contribution to the overall dust budget depends on the amount of dust produced per SN, and how much of it survives passing through the reverse shock generated by the interaction of the ejecta with the surrounding interstellar medium.

I've been working on the infrared thermal dust emission from the Cassiopeia A (Cas A) SNR. Most (although not all) previous analyses of the dust emission have been based on fitting a number of single-temperature components to the observed spectral energy distribution (SED). Our approach was to divide the remnant into four gas components, with densities, temperatures and gas masses obtained from a range of observations. The observed SED can then be used to determine the amount of dust present in each gas component, for a given composition and size distribution. This confirmed the presence of a large (~0.6 solar masses) mass of dust in the unshocked ejecta, which suggests a dust-to-gas mass ratio of >0.2 when combined with recent gas mass estimates. The ratio in the shocked ejecta clumps is similar, suggesting that dust in clumps is well protected from destruction, whereas most of the dust in the diffuse material is destroyed. We also found that silicate grains reproduced most of the SED features well, with carbon grains, if present, only making up a small fraction of the mass (<25%), consistent with the oxygen-rich environment in the SNR.
