---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: /research/
---
### Dust emission from supernova remnants

Core collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are a potential source of the large amounts of dust seen in some high-redshift galaxies. They occur rapidly (compared to galaxy evolution timescales), and many supernova remnants (SNRs) show evidence of dust formation in the ejecta. The contribution to the overall dust budget depends on the amount of dust produced per SN, and how much of it survives passing through the reverse shock generated by the interaction of the ejecta with the surrounding interstellar medium.

I've been working on the infrared thermal dust emission from the Cassiopeia A (Cas A) SNR. Most (although not all) previous analyses of the dust emission have been based on fitting a number of single-temperature components to the observed spectral energy distribution (SED). Our approach was to divide the remnant into four gas components, with densities, temperatures and gas masses obtained from a range of observations. The observed SED can then be used to determine the amount of dust present in each gas component, for a given composition and size distribution. This confirmed the presence of a large (~0.6 solar masses) mass of dust in the unshocked ejecta, which suggests a dust-to-gas mass ratio of >0.2 when combined with recent gas mass estimates. The ratio in the shocked ejecta clumps is similar, suggesting that dust in clumps is well protected from destruction, whereas most of the dust in the diffuse material is destroyed. We also found that silicate grains reproduced most of the SED features well, with carbon grains, if present, only making up a small fraction of the mass (<25%), consistent with the oxygen-rich environment in the SNR.

### ArH+ in the Crab Nebula

ArH+, the first (and so far only) noble gas molecule to be detected in space, was discovered in the Crab Nebula by its rotational emission lines. It has subsequently also been detected in absorption in the interstellar medium (ISM), where it appears to exist in regions with low (~10^-4) abundances of molecular hydrogen, which efficiently destroys it. The Crab Nebula, a supernova remnant with a pulsar wind nebula (PWN) at its centre which irradiates the surrounding ejecta with ionizing radiation, is a more extreme environment than the ISM, which may result in other chemical reactions playing a more important role.

We used photoionization code MOCASSIN to determine the incident ultraviolet (UV) and X-ray fluxes on a clump of material in the Crab Nebula, which we then modelled using photodissociation region (PDR) code UCL_PDR. In order to reproduce the observed ArH+ and OH+ line emission, we required an increase in the cosmic ray ionization rate of >10^7 times the standard ISM value. This is consistent with the estimated charged particle flux from the central PWN, and suggests that the molecular hydrogen emission from the Crab is powered by cosmic ray heating, rather than turbulence or shocks. Our models also required an ArH+ dissociative recombination reaction rate ~100 times lower than the experimental upper bound - subsequent theoretical calculations of this rate found a value >10x lower in the relevant temperature range. The properties of clumps which reproduced the observed molecular emission are similar to the molecular hydrogen knots and dusty globules seen in the Crab Nebula, suggesting the ArH+ emission is produced by these objects.

### OH+ emission from planetary nebulae

Observations of planetary nebulae (PNe) with the Herschel Space Observatory detected OH+ emission - but no ArH+ - from five objects, all with central star temperatures above 100 kK. We used the modelling approach from the Crab Nebula to investigate the molecular emission from PNe with varying central star properties. We found it was necessary to account for the ionizing UV flux from the central star, which creates a hot (~10^4 K), ionized layer at the surface of the clump. This produces the observed OH+ and molecular hydrogen emission, while CO rotational lines originate from the shielded deeper regions. Central stars with temperatures <80 kK do not have ionizing UV fluxes high enough to produce strong OH+ emission, explaining why only PNe with relatively hot central stars have OH+ detections. Predicted ArH+ surface brightnesses were below detection thresholds, although emission from HeH+ - which has not been found in any object - was predicted to be detectable. This may be resolved by the inclusion of photodissociation reactions for this molecule, which were neglected in our modelling.
